Add org.freedesktop.Sdk.Extension.podman (#8677)
flathub/flathub: README.md

# org.freedesktop.Sdk.Extension.podman

This extension adds Podman support for Flatpak applications.

To use the Podman SDK, set the following environment variable per application:

```bash
FLATPAK_ENABLE_SDK_EXT=podman
```

For applications that require Podman socket support:

```bash
systemctl --user enable podman.socket --now
flatpak override --user --filesystem=xdg-run/podman:ro app-id
```

The socket path should be available inside the Flatpak application:

```bash
$XDG_RUNTIME_DIR/podman/podman.sock
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
WARNING:
podman/podman-compose won't work by default here, because nested containers in Flatpak are problematic.
They only can work in "remote" mode, e.g. to connect via UNIX socket to Podman service on host.

While podman has `--remote` option, podman-compose [doesn't have one](https://github.com/containers/podman-compose/issues/849).
So the only way to make it work is trick them to use remote mode by default.

There are two known possibilities to do so:
- Inside the Flatpak, create [containers.conf](https://github.com/containers/container-libs/blob/main/common/docs/containers.conf.5.md) file with following content:
>   ```console
>   $ cat $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/containers/containers.conf
>   [engine]
>   remote = true
>   ```
- Set the environment variable `CONTAINER_HOST`. You can even set it to an empty value, that will use Podman socket for the remote:
>   ```console
>   $ export CONTAINER_HOST=
>   $ podman-compose ...
>   # or
>   $ CONTAINER_HOST= podman-compose ...
>   ```

The other alternative is to run podman/podman-compose on host via host-spawn or flatpak-spawn in flatpak.
For VS Code flatpak and maybe others, you would also need to share `/tmp` directory to build Dev Containers there:
> ```console
> flatpak override --user --filesystem=/tmp com.visualstudio.code
> ```

```

Author: Can you please use a title instead? e.g. Interact with host containers

It's not a warning, because it depends on your setup. 

Also add /tmp to the devcontainers section, under the socket command.

Reviewer: Done:
https://github.com/francoism90/flathub/pull/2

## Usage

### PhpStorm

To use with [PhpStorm](https://github.com/flathub/com.jetbrains.PhpStorm), make sure to set the connection type to 'Podman'.

You may also need to set the podman socket path to allow full container integration (`$XDG_RUNTIME_DIR/podman/podman.sock`).

### Visual Studio Code / VSCodium

To use with [VSCode](https://github.com/flathub/com.visualstudio.code), allow access to the Podman socket:

```bash
flatpak override --user --filesystem=xdg-run/podman:ro com.visualstudio.code
```

Open VSCode, run command `Open User Settings (JSON)` and append:

```json
"containers.composeCommand": "/usr/lib/sdk/podman/bin/podman-compose",
"containers.containerCommand": "/usr/lib/sdk/podman/bin/podman-remote",
"dev.containers.dockerComposePath": "/usr/lib/sdk/podman/bin/podman-compose",
"dev.containers.dockerPath": "/usr/lib/sdk/podman/bin/podman-remote",
"dev.containers.dockerSocketPath": "/run/user/<UID>/podman/podman.sock",
"docker.dockerPath": "/usr/lib/sdk/podman/bin/podman-remote"
```

> Note: Replace <UID> with the user-id that runs the socket.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note: For podman-compose, see the WARNING above.

```

# org.freedesktop.Sdk.Extension.podman

This extension adds Podman support for Flatpak applications.

To use the Podman SDK, set the following environment variable per application:

```bash
FLATPAK_ENABLE_SDK_EXT=podman
```

For applications that require Podman socket support:

```bash
systemctl --user enable podman.socket --now
flatpak override --user --filesystem=xdg-run/podman:ro app-id
```

The socket path should be available inside the Flatpak application:

```bash

> /run/user/<UID>/podman/podman.sock

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$XDG_RUNTIME_DIR/podman/podman.sock
```
I believe even if UID differs, the variable expansion should point to the right place here both in the flatpak and host.
Also, it's copy-pasteable variant.

> ```

Reviewer: The variant with host-spawn podman(-compose) should also be mentioned here.
It doesn't require the podman.sock.

Author: Doesn't that break the sandbox?

Reviewer: It does, still I think it's good alternative here as the socket passthrough is quite cumbersome.
So it worth mentioning, at least.

Reviewer: The other argument I didn't mention about - it's not easy to force local podman-compose work remotely:
https://github.com/containers/podman-compose/issues/1432
That holds true even if you have podman installed in sdk:
https://github.com/containers/podman-compose/issues/849

By the way, I think we should document [this](https://github.com/containers/podman-compose/issues/849#issuecomment-4200079859) too:
> The other possibility is to set remote = true in [containers.conf](https://github.com/containers/container-libs/blob/main/common/docs/containers.conf.5.md).

As you see, it's yet another hack needed to make it work without breaking the sandbox.
Alternatively, maybe we could link podman to podman-remote to trick podman-compose work remotely.

The point is - there is no good, out of the box way anyway, so we should document all the possibilities.

Author: You shouldn't set that:

```man
remote = false

Indicates whether the application should be running in remote mode. This flag modifies the --remote option on container engines. Setting the flag to true will default podman --remote=true for access to the remote Podman service.
```

A socket is way faster. I think remote mode changes this to only use SSH connections.

Reviewer: That's needed even for socket - otherwise, podman tries to work locally.

Author: That's the idea, it keeps using the local podman instance.

You should only set this, if you host your podman service somewhere else.

Reviewer: Wait a minute - you use `podman-remote` and set up the socket to be able to talk to the host's podman service ("remote" one), isn't it?
So podman-compose should also talk to it, not any "nested" flatpak podman instance.

Reviewer: @francoism90 could you reopen this thread, please? I believe it's essential.
We shouldn't end up with the mess of local and remotes containers.

If you want to have both, you should document the both way, so `remote = true` trick above should be present in the doc for the socket way.

@bbhtt

Reviewer 2: reopened, can you also post a link to the thread in the comment, if you want it reopened?

Looks like Github stopped doing that in the email so I have to look through every resolved thread to find it.

Author: @bam80 Yes, I haven't tested this scenario, but I actually think you can host your podman instance somewhere else (e.g. cloud). They can talk with each other.

The current only is focused on making it work locally, like when you use Fedora Silverblue. It includes Podman, but no other tools.

Reviewer: > [@francoism90](https://github.com/francoism90) could you reopen this thread, please? I believe it's essential. We shouldn't end up with the mess of local and remotes containers.
> 
> If you want to have both, you should document the both way, so `remote = true` trick above should be present in the doc for the socket way.

@bbhtt this wasn't addressed either, and should be reopened, too:
https://github.com/flathub/flathub/pull/8677/changes#r3349062336

`podman-compose` doesn't work here as we supply it, for local UNIX socket configuration, too.
To make it work, we either:
- (preferable) get rid of real podman binary and replace it with symbolic link to podman-remote. That should make `podman-compose` just work, with no additional tweaking needed.
There is no sacrifice as `podman` binary doesn't work without UNIX socket here, anyway. So `podman-remote` can fully substitute it.
- If we keep `podman` binary, the way to make `podman-compose` work becomes non-trivial, as it requires manual intervention now, so we should document it:
_The workaround I found is to set `remote = true` in [containers.conf](https://github.com/containers/container-libs/blob/main/common/docs/containers.conf.5.md)._
That's needed even for  _local_ UNIX socket, otherwise `podman-compose` tries to use flatpak-nested container and breaks, with no obvious reason and no way to fix via VS Code settings, etc.
_So it's essential to document it in this PR, I believe._

Author: Why would podman-remote be a symlink for podman? It's up to the user to configure or overrule this if needed. I don't see why this can be a problem, as previously it wasn't provided at all. 

The workaround is an opt-in, it changes the behaviour of the Podman daemon, it can affect current configurations.

Please tell me what I should include, but it shouldn't be mandatory for the SDK to work. Like I said a couple of times now, the user may need to adjust, which is the same for any SDK: rust, nodejs, etc. 

To be honest I'm kinda done with this discussion. I do understand things can be documented, but like @bbhtt already explained, this can be done after release, it's not a breaking thing (podman + podman-compose weren't even included before).

> Note: replace `$USER_ID` with the current user-id (`id -u`) and make sure the path exists on the host.

## Usage

### PhpStorm

To use with [PhpStorm](https://github.com/flathub/com.jetbrains.PhpStorm), make sure to set the connection type to 'Podman'.

You may also need to set the podman socket path to allow full container integration.

### Visual Studio Code / VSCodium

To use with [VSCode](https://github.com/flathub/com.visualstudio.code), allow access to the Podman socket:

```bash
flatpak override --user --filesystem=xdg-run/podman:ro com.visualstudio.code
```

Open VSCode, run command `Open User Settings (JSON)` and append:

```json
"dev.containers.dockerPath": "/usr/lib/sdk/podman/bin/podman-remote",

> "dev.containers.dockerSocketPath": "/run/user/$USER_ID/podman/podman.sock",

Reviewer: Do we need to replace $USER_ID with the actual UID here?

Author: Yes, I can change it to UID.

> "docker.dockerPath": "/usr/lib/sdk/podman/bin/podman-remote"

Reviewer: podman-compose should be added, too.

Author: done

# org.freedesktop.Sdk.Extension.podman

This extension adds Podman support for Flatpak applications.

> To use the Podman SDK, set the following environment variable per application:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use the Podman SDK in IDE apps from Flathub, set the following environment variable per application:
```
@bbhtt I assume it's more correct then?

Reviewer 2: seems fine.

Author: Yeah, I assume you can use the SDK also in none IDE applications later. They just have to expose that env.

Reviewer: @francoism90 You can, but for non-IDE (non-Flathub?) the `FLATPAK_ENABLE_SDK_EXT` variable is not applicable. And also it's not documented.
This creates a confusion, that is why the nitpick above.

```bash

> FLATPAK_ENABLE_SDK_EXT=podman

Reviewer: This apparently is VS Code specific?
https://github.com/flathub/com.visualstudio.code/blob/25f9c9033ccaff29bef83dc9f80a1b869580009c/code.sh#L47
Should make a note if so.

Author: @bam80 No, this is per application. On PHPStorm you also need to set this (or whatever application you use).

https://github.com/search?q=org%3Aflathub%20FLATPAK_ENABLE_SDK_EXT&type=code

I'm not an expert, but I believe this is a reserved Flatpak env variable? It should also with Zed for example. I don't use Zed, so I cannot test it.

Reviewer: > I'm not an expert, but I believe this is a reserved Flatpak env variable? 

I didn't find it anywhere in the Flatpak doc. So it looks like it's just copied from app to app, so wording here could be:
"For the apps explicitly supporting FLATPAK_ENABLE_SDK_EXT ..."

@bbhtt Do you have some insight here?

Reviewer 2: it's not a Flatpak env var, it comes from ide-flatpak-wrapper https://github.com/flathub-infra/ide-flatpak-wrapper

Apps would be able to use the env var if they are using that which most IDE oriented apps in Flathub do.

Author: I assume it's correct in the README? :)

Reviewer: Almost. I created a new nitpick above. Unfortunately, I can't resolve/unresolve myself here.
@bbhtt

```

For applications that require Podman socket support:

```bash
systemctl --user enable podman.socket --now
flatpak override --user --filesystem=xdg-run/podman:ro app-id
```

The socket path should be available inside the Flatpak application:

```bash
/run/user/$UID/podman/podman.sock
```

> > Note: replace `$UID` with the current user-id (`id -u`) and make sure the path exists on the host.

Reviewer: There is no need to replace the `$UID` here, as it works perfectly with the variable substitution.
So the "replace" note should be rather moved down to the VS Code Settings clause.

Author: The user-id can be completly different, for example systemd-user has a really large uid. If you have any suggestion in making this more clear, please let me know. :)

You can make a PR to my repo or a diff here.

### PhpStorm

To use with [PhpStorm](https://github.com/flathub/com.jetbrains.PhpStorm), make sure to set the connection type to 'Podman'.

You may also need to set the podman socket path to allow full container integration (`$XDG_RUNTIME_DIR/podman/podman.sock`).

### Visual Studio Code / VSCodium

To use with [VSCode](https://github.com/flathub/com.visualstudio.code), allow access to the Podman socket:

```bash
flatpak override --user --filesystem=xdg-run/podman:ro com.visualstudio.code
```

Open VSCode, run command `Open User Settings (JSON)` and append:

```json
"containers.composeCommand": "/usr/lib/sdk/podman/bin/podman-compose",
"dev.containers.dockerComposePath": "/usr/lib/sdk/podman/bin/podman-compose",
"dev.containers.dockerPath": "/usr/lib/sdk/podman/bin/podman-remote",

> "dev.containers.dockerSocketPath": "/run/user/<UID>/podman/podman.sock",

Reviewer: Let me emphasize it the other way why the additional documentation is needed.

Here `dockerSocketPath` influences behavior of `dockerPath` only, when VSC uses it directly.
We can't force podman-compose (`dockerComposePath`) to obey this setting, too (neither VSC can).
Which is a pity, but this is what we have for now.

So we should document all the workarounds we found for this non-obvious problem. Otherwise, podman-compose just breaks.
The one I found and tested is adding `remote = true` to the containers.conf file.

@francoism90 Could you please try VS Code **compose-based Dev Container** yourself, make it work and document the workaround above and maybe what you'll find appropriate, before claiming this PR as ready? Or I can actually add the text myself, if you wish.

This is the last blocker remained to me.
Thanks.

Author: Why does or should it break? Enabling remote is an opt-in.

"dev.containers.dockerPath": "/usr/lib/sdk/podman/bin/podman-remote",

> "dev.containers.dockerSocketPath": "/run/user/$UID/podman/podman.sock",

Reviewer: ```suggestion
"dev.containers.dockerSocketPath": "/run/user/<UID>/podman/podman.sock",
```
And move the note about UID replacement from the above to here.
(Assuming you checked $UID won't work here).

Author: @bam80 I replaced everywhere with <UID>, hope it's more clear. :)

> Note: Replace <UID> with the user-id that runs the socket.

Restart the editor to apply changes.

### Devcontainers

> Update the project `devcontainer.json` file with `runArgs` that apply to Podman:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Update the project `devcontainer.json` file with `runArgs`.
NOTE: `--userns` won't work in Docker.
```
Also, could you add a note why these two are needed? I didn't face the need of `--init`, personally.

Author: @bam80 Passing --init to devcontainers is highly recommended. To my knowledge this prevents zombie processes and a layer of protection against file corruption. 

Microsoft devcontainers do pass this already, but it shouldn't hurt if it's also passed on top of that.

```json
{
  "runArgs": ["--userns=keep-id", "--init"]
}
```

Other useful `runArgs` may be `--network=systemd-networkname` to allow network integration, and `--security-opt=label=disable` for SELinux to prevent setting labels.

It may be required for certain devcontainers to force the Docker format:

```json
{

>   "runArgs": ["--userns=keep-id", "--init"],

Reviewer: Just a question - people complain this is not compatible to docker, can you confirm?

Author: That's true, this only works Podman. It's assumed you run podman (or with docker-podman if you really need it).

When you're a docker user, you should omit the `userns=keep-id`.

Reviewer: > When you're a docker user, you should omit the userns=keep-id.

Could we explicitly say it here, please? It's not obvious at all.
